* intro: what needs to be done for language acquisition
* motivation: why do computational modeling?
* segmentation: the problem 
* what do we know about human segmentation?
* cues
* example segmentation: display of cues
* the norm: language modeling or MDL
* predictability: Harris' method
* predictability: other measures
* how to do it? peaks in unpredictability
* how well can we segment using predictability?
* the example segmentation: mystery revealed.
* conclusions and more

-- title page

This talk is about using computational methods for answering questions
about human language acquisition. The particular area of acquisition
we are interested in here is discovering words in continuous speech.

-- the puzzle to solve

I'd like to start the talk with a puzzle. What you see in this slide
will serve as a demonstrative example of the input the children
receive. Each line contains an English utterance, taken from actual
speech directed to infants. The spaces are removed from the
utterances. Because, it's an artifact of writing systems. Fluent
speech does not have reliable boundary markers. Furthermore, the
letters are transformed systematically to remove the advantage of
knowledge English words. Children start with no lexical knowledge.
Throughout this talk this text will serve as an approximation to the
input children receive during language acquisition.

Having bombarded with sequences like that, children need to ...  For
this talk we will be interested in the very first problem: how can one
able to discover words from an input like that? 

-- computational models of language acquisition

The methods I will discuss is modeling and simulating the problem
computationally. Before going into real problem, one may ask: how can
a computational model help understanding human cognitive skills.

Many questions of language acquisition are difficult to investigate
directly. Computational models can be used for providing insights into
some of the questions, and as a method to test of the theories.

An actual computational modeling forces precise theorizing. One can
skip many rough edges and avoid describing difficult aspects that may
matter while verbally describing a theory. However, one cannot build a
computer simulation without explicit description of every step.

Computational simulations are not the only way to formalize a theory.
One can also use mathematical methods describe theories precisely on
paper. However some aspects of the learning, such as the input
children receive during acquisition, are not easy to formalize. A
computational simulation allows us to skip modeling these aspects, but
simply use the real data.

-- segmentation: back to the puzzle

Hoping that I convinced you that the computational modeling approach
taken here is a way to study language acquisition, we will now take
another look at our puzzle. Our puzzle will serve as a demonstrative
example of what children hear during language acquisition. However, I
should note that, this is simplified in many ways. The representation
here assumes letters, in children's case phonemes, are already
recognized. This is not necessarily the case in early stages of
language acquisition. Furthermore, acoustic signal is much more varied
and noisy than this example. Despite these simplifications, the
solution to this puzzle will help us demonstrate the part of the
segmentation problem we are going to discuss now. 

The puzzle looks rather difficult. But, we are not that helpless.
There are certain cues that can help.

So far, I claimed that the acoustic noise and variation makes
segmentation difficult. However, some properties of acoustic signal
helps finding boundaries. These properties are of course, removed when
we transcribe speech as in this example. Some examples of these
acoustic properties are listed here. For example, even though pauses
do not occur consistently at word boundaries, when they occur, they
correlate with word (most of the time phrase) boundaries. Lexical
stress also helps, for example, in English most two-syllable words
follow strong-weak stress pattern. As a result, hearing a stressed
syllable is a good predictor of a word beginning. Coarticulation is
the phenomenon that the sounds at the boundary of words get fused, and
pronounced differently. Allophonic alternations refers to the fact
that some phonemes pronounced differently depending on their location
in the word. As it is probably clear from the input on the left, we
will not deal with these cues in this talk. But, acoustic cues are not
the only cues that help for segmentation.

If we know some words already, it helps spotting other words. For
example if we new that this particular sequence, `uibu', here is a
word, then we would expect boundaries before and after the word.

If we look a little bit closer, we see some more regularities that may
help. For example, if we look at the utterance boundaries, we see some
reoccurring patterns. For example the pattern ...

-- 


